Adds understanding IBC denom tutorial (#727)
cosmos/sdk-tutorials: understanding-ibc-denoms/index.md

---
parent:
  title: Understand IBC Denoms with Gaia
order: 0
description: Send tokens with IBC and trace a denom, understand how denoms work.
---

# Understand IBC Denoms with Gaia

One of the most powerful technologies when using the Cosmos SDK is the Interblockchain Communication Protocol (IBC). While with Cosmos every blockchain is intended to be soverign and application specific, with IBC every blockchain can connect to another blockchain using the IBC protocol. This will eventually create a system of soverign _and_ connected blockchains.

## Introduction

The current most used feature with IBC is sending token from one blockchain to another. When sending a token from one blockchain to another, you will end up with a token `voucher` on the other (target) blockchain.

Imagine two blockchains, blockchain A and blockchain B. In the beginning, you have your token on blockchain A.

![IBC token transfer](./ibc_token.png "IBC token transfer")
*Sending token from blockchain A to blockchain B*

> When sending the token with IBC to another blockchain, your token will be locked up on blockchain A and create a `voucher` replacement token on blockchain B. The only way to unlock the locked tokens on blockchain A is to "send back" the `voucher` token on blockchain B. The `voucher` token on blockchain B in result will be burned.

Author: :praise: amazing. Splitting up the steps and explaining them way more coherent and understandable. Thanks @barriebyron 🙏

In this tutorial you will learn the format of the `voucher` token on blockchain B. What information they include, how they look like and how to make sense of them. The information of the token is described as an `IBC denom`. You can parse this IBC denom and receive information about the `voucher` and from which blockchain it came from.

**You will learn how to:**

- Trace the IBC denom
- Understand how denoms work
- Find out which chain the token came from

## Requirements

Install the gaia binary:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/cosmos/gaia.git
cd gaia
git checkout v5.0.0
make install

gaiad version
```

The output of `gaiad version` should print

```bash
v5.0.0
```

> ## What is this IBC denom

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What Is This IBC Denom
```

Reviewer: applying sentence case capitalization to follow Tendermint heading style

> The `voucher` token that were introduced are called IBC Denominations (IBC denom). They are the result of a token transfer using IBC from one blockchain to another. The format of the token is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `voucher` tokens introduced in the asset transfer are called IBC Denominations (IBC denom). The voucher tokens are the result of a token transfer using IBC from one blockchain to another. The format of the voucher token is:
```

`ibc/DENOMHASH`.

> Imagine that you've received a new `ibc/` token on blockchain B where you initially held `samoleans` and `stake` token.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Imagine that you've received a new `ibc/` token on blockchain B where you initially held `samoleans` and `stake` token.

```

Reviewer: let's always use single lines, so I've added an extra space after the paragraph. Let's follow this guideline to add a blank line after each paragraph, code snippet, whatever. Following the advice in https://www.markdownguide.org/basic-syntax/

Your balance now looks like:

`1000000ibc/CDC4587874B85BEA4FCEC3CEA5A1195139799A1FEE711A07D972537E18FDA39D,100000000000samoleans,99999977256stake`

Just like `samoleans` or `stake`, `ibc/CDC458787...` is the denomination (denom) of the token received from IBC, the latter part behind the slash `CDC458787...` is a hash of the denom, IBC port, and channel.

> Why is `CDC458787...` a hash? It contains paths that track the token on multiple hops from other blockchains to your account, it could potentially be unbearably long when directly printing the path. Additionally, the Cosmos SDK has a 64-character limit on the denomination of the token.

Author: :praise: again, good idea to split up the logic

> The tradeoff of using a hash is that you must query a node to find out what the actual path and denomination is. This query is called the `denomtrace`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The tradeoff of using a hash is that you must query a node to find out what the actual path and denomination is. This query is called the `ibc-transfer denom-trace`.
```

> The tradeoff of using a hash is that you must query a node to find out what the actual path and denomination is. This query is called the `denomtrace`.

Reviewer: the command uses both `ibc-transfer denom-trace` so I added the ibc-transfer here for clarity

> Follow along with the `gaiad` subcommands to query the denom and learn about the channel they came from.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow along with the `gaiad` subcommands to query the denom and learn about the channel the tokens came from.
```

```bash
gaiad query ibc-transfer denom-trace CDC4587874B85BEA4FCEC3CEA5A1195139799A1FEE711A07D972537E18FDA39D --node https://rpc.testnet.cosmos.network:443
```

Response:

```bash
denom_trace:
  base_denom: moon
  path: transfer/channel-14
```

> From this command, you now know that there is an IBC port `transfer` and channel `channel-14`. But to know the IBC light client behind the port and channel, you need to perform another query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From the command output, you now know that there is an IBC port `transfer` and channel `channel-14`. But to know the IBC light client behind the port and channel, you need to perform another query.
```

Why is it called a light client? Because it is a light client of the _other_ chain, keeping track of its blockhashes. The `ibc channel client-state transfer` command  explains the details of the denom path.

```bash
gaiad query ibc channel client-state transfer channel-14 --node https://rpc.cosmos.network:443
```

> Response

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Response:
```

  allow_update_after_misbehaviour: true
  chain_id: mars
  frozen_height:
    revision_height: "0"
    revision_number: "0"
  latest_height:
    revision_height: "2207"
    revision_number: "0"
  max_clock_drift: 600s
  proof_specs:
  - inner_spec:
      child_order:
      - 0
      - 1
      child_size: 33
      empty_child: null
      hash: SHA256
      max_prefix_length: 12
      min_prefix_length: 4
    leaf_spec:
      hash: SHA256
      length: VAR_PROTO
      prefix: AA==
      prehash_key: NO_HASH
      prehash_value: SHA256
    max_depth: 0
    min_depth: 0
  - inner_spec:
      child_order:
      - 0
      - 1
      child_size: 32
      empty_child: null
      hash: SHA256
      max_prefix_length: 1
      min_prefix_length: 1
    leaf_spec:
      hash: SHA256
      length: VAR_PROTO
      prefix: AA==
      prehash_key: NO_HASH
      prehash_value: SHA256
    max_depth: 0
    min_depth: 0
  trust_level:
    denominator: "3"
    numerator: "1"
  trusting_period: 1209600s
  unbonding_period: 1814400s
  upgrade_path:
  - upgrade
  - upgradedIBCState
```

That's a lot of information, but it doesn't answer the question: how do you know if this IBC client can be relied upon?

> ### The chain ID and The client ID

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### The Chain ID and the Client ID
```

> Anybody can start a chain with the same chain ID, but the IBC client ID is generated by the [Cosmos SDK IBC Keeper module](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-go/blob/e012a4af5614f8774bcb595962012455667db2cf/modules/core/02-client/keeper/keeper.go#L56) (ICS-02 does not specify a standard for IBC client IDs). A Chain Name Service and the not-so-decentralized Github chain-registrar repo can verify the combination of the two. Both the Chain Name Service and the chain-registrar repo are under development.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Anybody can start a chain with the same chain ID. However, the IBC client ID is generated by the [Cosmos SDK IBC Keeper module](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-go/blob/e012a4af5614f8774bcb595962012455667db2cf/modules/core/02-client/keeper/keeper.go#L56) (ICS-02 does not specify a standard for IBC client IDs). A Chain Name Service and the not-so-decentralized Github chain-registrar repo can verify the combination of the chain ID and the client ID. Both the Chain Name Service and the chain-registrar repo are under development and are considered experimental.
```

Reviewer: @toschdev wdyt about using "experimental"?

Author: perfect, thanks

> ### Ensure the IBC client isn't expired

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Ensure the IBC Client Isn't Expired
```

> In the event that Tendermint consensus fails (if >1/3 of validators produce a conflicting block), _and_ proof of this consensus failure is submitted on chain, the IBC client becomes frozen with a `frozen_height` that is nonzero. In the above example this is not the case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the event that Tendermint consensus fails (if >1/3 of validators produce a conflicting block), _and_ proof of this consensus failure is submitted on-chain, the IBC client becomes frozen with a `frozen_height` that is nonzero. In the previous example, the output of `gaiad query ibc channel client-state` confirms the client status and you know the IBC client is not expired. 
```

Reviewer: I went digging to try to understand what "this" (a favorite of ours, the dreaded "unclear reference" we all love) is referring to... I _think_ that we're talking about the client status?

Author: You are correct 👍

> The `latest_height.revision_height` is the block height when the IBC client was last updated. To ensure that the block height is still up to date, you would have to query the blockchain itself for the block height 2207, and ensure that the timestamp of that block + the `trusting_period` of 1209600s/336h/14d is beyond the current time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `latest_height.revision_height` is the block height when the IBC client was last updated. To ensure that the block height is still up to date, you would have to query the blockchain itself for the block height 2207, and ensure that the timestamp of that block + the `trusting_period` of 1209600s/336h/14d is after the current time.
```

> For example using the query:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, you can verify the IBC client status using the query:
```

```bash
gaiad query block 5200792 --node https://rpc.cosmos.network:443
```

> ## Find another Blockchains Path

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Find the Path of Another Blockchain
```

> It is still an unsolved problem to list all possible blockchain paths.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Being able to list all possible blockchain paths is still an unsolved problem.

```

Any created blockchain can create a new `channel` to another blockchain without revealing too much of its information.

> Currently channels need to be communicated with each other from person to person to be trustable. This way you can identify by an IBC denom which tokens to accept for an app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, channels must communicate with each other using a person-to-person protocol to be trustable. This person-to-person communication protocol uses an IBC denom so you can identify which tokens to accept for an app.
```

> One approach to solve this is with a centralized or decentralized database of chain IDs and their nodes. There are two solutions under development:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One approach to solve this problem is to use a centralized or decentralized database of chain IDs and their nodes.  There are two solutions under development:
```

- Chain Name Service (decentralized)

>   The [CNS](https://github.com/tendermint/cns) is aimed to be a Cosmos SDK module that the Cosmos Hub will one day run. As a hub through which cross-chain transactions go, it only makes sense for the Cosmos Hub to host the critical information on how to reach the other chain IDs. It is still new and under development.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The [CNS](https://github.com/tendermint/cns) aims to be a Cosmos SDK module that the Cosmos Hub will one day run. As a hub through which cross-chain transactions go, it only makes sense for the Cosmos Hub to host the critical information on how to reach the other chain IDs. CNS is still new and under development.
```

- Cosmos Registry (semi-decentralized)

>   The [github.com/cosmos/registry](https://github.com/cosmos/registry) repo is a "stopgap" solution. Each chain ID has a folder describing its genesis and a list of peers. To claim their chain ID, a blockchain operator must fork this repo, create a branch with their chain ID, and submit a pull request to include their chain ID in the official `cosmos/registry` of chain IDs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The [github.com/cosmos/registry](https://github.com/cosmos/registry) repo is a stopgap solution. Each chain ID has a folder describing its genesis and a list of peers. To claim their chain ID, a blockchain operator must fork the `registry` repo, create a branch with their chain ID, and submit a pull request to include their chain ID in the official `cosmos/registry` of chain IDs.
```

>   Every chain ID is represented by a folder, and within that foldera `peers.json` file contains a list of nodes that you can connect to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Every chain ID is represented by a folder, and within that folder a `peers.json` file contains a list of nodes that you can connect to.
```

- Cosmos Registrar (semi-decentralized)
  
  The [cosmos-registrar](https://github.com/apeunit/cosmos-registrar) is a tool that was started by Jack Zampolin and further developed by Ape Unit. The cosmos-registrar automates claiming and updating a chain ID. In this case, updating a chain ID means committing a fresh peerlist to the GitHub repository. This commit should be run with a cronjob. Its state is best described as v1.0, so go ahead and report any bugs as Github issues.

> Choose which approach suites you and your usecase best.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Choose the approach that best suits you and your use case.
```

Imagine that you've received a new `ibc/` token on a blockchain:

`1000000ibc/27A6394C3F9FF9C9DCF5DFFADF9BB5FE9A37C7E92B006199894CF1824DF9AC7C,100000000000samoleans,99999977256stake`

Just like `samoleans` or `stake`, `ibc/27A639...` is the denomination (denom) of the token received from IBC, but `27A639...` is a hash of the denom, IBC port, and channel.

Why is `27A639...` a hash? Paths that track the token on multiple hops from other blockchains to your account would be unbearably long. The Cosmos SDK has a 64-character limit on the denomination of the token.

The tradeoff is that you must query the node to find out what the actual path and denomination is. This node query is called the `denomtrace`. 

In Cosmos SDK, the Gaia daemon `gaiad` runs a full node of the gaia application and provides a gRPC interface. The default port is  9090. In this tutorial, you will learn to query this interface directly. 

For now, follow along with the `gaiad` subcommands.

```bash
gaiad q ibc-transfer denom-trace 27A6394C3F9FF9C9DCF5DFFADF9BB5FE9A37C7E92B006199894CF1824DF9AC7C --node tcp://localhost:26557

> denom_trace:

Reviewer: I got lost here too, couldn't tell where the command ended and the denom_trace stuff started... or it's all the command?

  base_denom: samoleans
  path: transfer/channel-0
```

> From this command, you now know that there is an IBC port `transfer` and channel `channel-0`. But to know the IBC light client behind the port and channel, you need to perform another query. 

Reviewer: a ha that path defines the port and channel! (where do I learn about this path?)

>   path: transfer/channel-0

> Why is it called a light client? Because it is a light client of the _other_ chain, keeping track of its blockhashes. The `ibc channel client-state transfer` command  explains the details of the denom path. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Why is the path in IBC called a light client? Because it is a light client of the _other_ chain, keeping track of its blockhashes. The `ibc channel client-state transfer` command  explains the details of the denom path. 
```

Reviewer: I wasn't sure what "it" was in the sentence, I think we are describing the path in IBC (guessing here!)

```

> gaiad q ibc channel client-state transfer channel-0 --node tcp://localhost:26557

Reviewer: I got lost here too... is line 40 the command and then starting at line 41 is the output?

  allow_update_after_misbehaviour: false
  chain_id: ibc-0
  frozen_height:
    revision_height: "0"
    revision_number: "0"
  latest_height:
    revision_height: "43"
    revision_number: "0"
  max_clock_drift: 600s
  proof_specs:
  - inner_spec:
      child_order:
      - 0
      - 1
      child_size: 33
      empty_child: null
      hash: SHA256
      max_prefix_length: 12
      min_prefix_length: 4
    leaf_spec:
      hash: SHA256
      length: VAR_PROTO
      prefix: AA==
      prehash_key: NO_HASH
      prehash_value: SHA256
    max_depth: 0
    min_depth: 0
  - inner_spec:
      child_order:
      - 0
      - 1
      child_size: 32
      empty_child: null
      hash: SHA256
      max_prefix_length: 1
      min_prefix_length: 1
    leaf_spec:
      hash: SHA256
      length: VAR_PROTO
      prefix: AA==
      prehash_key: NO_HASH
      prehash_value: SHA256
    max_depth: 0
    min_depth: 0
  trust_level:
    denomination: "3"
    numerator: "1"
  trusting_period: 1209600s
  unbonding_period: 1814400s
  upgrade_path:
  - upgrade
  - upgradedIBCState
```

That's a lot of information, but it doesn't answer the question: how do you know if this IBC client can be relied upon?

> * Note the chain ID and the client ID.

Reviewer: not sure what's going on here, but am very interested to learn and know more. Is the asterisk * on line 101 a way of denoting a subheading? or a way to signal one of a series of things that help us know if the IBC client is trusted?

> Anybody can start a chain with the same chain ID, but the IBC client ID is generated by the [Cosmos SDK IBC module's Keeper](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-go/blob/e012a4af5614f8774bcb595962012455667db2cf/modules/core/02-client/keeper/keeper.go#L56) (ICS-02 does not specify a standard for IBC client IDs). A Chain Name Service and the not-so-decentralized Github chain-registrar repo can verify the combination of the two. Both the Chain Name Service and the chain-registrar repo are under development.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Anybody can start a chain with the same chain ID, but the IBC client ID is generated by the [Cosmos SDK IBC Keeper module](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-go/blob/e012a4af5614f8774bcb595962012455667db2cf/modules/core/02-client/keeper/keeper.go#L56) (ICS-02 does not specify a standard for IBC client IDs). A Chain Name Service and the not-so-decentralized Github chain-registrar repo can verify the combination of the two. Both the Chain Name Service and the chain-registrar repo are under development.
```

Reviewer: I don't know what ICS-02 is... should we link somewhere or say more about this?

## Verifying the Other Blockchain

Let's assume you are now connected to a node that belongs to chain B. 

- Chain A has an IBC light client that points to chain B.
- Chain B has an IBC light client that points to chain A.

First, you must verify that the node of 'chain B' is indeed the same 'chain B' that is registered in [github.com/cosmos/registry](https://github.com/cosmos/registry).
Then, you must verify that chain A's IBC light client is pointing to that very same 'chain B'.

Finally, you must verify that chain B's IBC light client is pointing to chain A and that 'chain B' is the same chain B that is mentioned in `github.com/cosmos/registry`.

Check the `light-roots/latest.json` file under each chain ID folder in [cosmos/registry](https://github.com/cosmos/registry). This folder is created when a chain ID is first claimed.

```json
$ cat light-roots/latest.json
{
  "trust-height": 70,
  "trust-hash": "78AD39C7DBB0C28AA1DD4DBF909E8FC37522CAB177484871AB3FBD18B2F165B4"
}
```

Connect to one of the peers in `peers.json`. Its block at height 70 should have the hash `78AD39C7DBB0C28AA1DD4DBF909E8FC37522CAB177484871AB3FBD18B2F165B4`.

```sh
$ curl localhost:26657/commit?height=70

> {

Reviewer: so line 158 is the command? or lines 158-... are the command?

        "last_block_id": {
          "hash": "BFD79481181393C07624680CB2FFCF98FC0CA13A810EAEDAF99EEE117530E2C3",
          "parts": {
            "total": 1,
            "hash": "BF7E0BC1DCC70D6F88522F5E941E8CE0A9F8FFF2623CB346E0DBA8419F13D8CF"
          }
        },
        "last_commit_hash": "0871E3E26E359B8C86E72D205A8A609EA9E369DDEAF348ADC94B1AE1F78E2309",
        "data_hash": "E3B0C44298FC1C149AFBF4C8996FB92427AE41E4649B934CA495991B7852B855",
        "validators_hash": "B27189A358F6D20965B1BC2CF47564EF2A9B5D6A2C0D6CB7BE1F922BE39110E9",
        "next_validators_hash": "B27189A358F6D20965B1BC2CF47564EF2A9B5D6A2C0D6CB7BE1F922BE39110E9",
        "consensus_hash": "048091BC7DDC283F77BFBF91D73C44DA58C3DF8A9CBC867405D8B7F3DAADA22F",
        "app_hash": "2AD963954E56AD5055D66D1D92D19CBEA6FF65A1DF246F13293C5548B6974691",
        "last_results_hash": "E3B0C44298FC1C149AFBF4C8996FB92427AE41E4649B934CA495991B7852B855",
        "evidence_hash": "E3B0C44298FC1C149AFBF4C8996FB92427AE41E4649B934CA495991B7852B855",
        "proposer_address": "2A4AEFBCD5934C1C7D80540822CC978DDE7BBF89"
      },
      "commit": {
        "height": "70",
        "round": 0,
        "block_id": {

> >>>>>>>>> "hash": "78AD39C7DBB0C28AA1DD4DBF909E8FC37522CAB177484871AB3FBD18B2F165B4", <<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<

Reviewer: is this a merge conflict? or ?? intended

          "parts": {
            "total": 1,
            "hash": "0292B8FC1A1FC2862699AD0CC33AEB5719DC183EA04705C1D4C8F01C0ABAD3E2"
          }
        },
        "signatures": [
          {
            "block_id_flag": 2,
            "validator_address": "2A4AEFBCD5934C1C7D80540822CC978DDE7BBF89",
            "timestamp": "2021-05-22T17:06:29.957359812Z",
            "signature": "RsbFvAANBPXdeGYHwBZsHUeHU/uJzWNWrbQ5UZa1lsUTpKALUPdTTnBwRjvnpbX44z3oH1RefHup+ZPjOf2UDQ=="
          }
        ]
      }
    },
    "canonical": true
  }
```

As of 25 May 2021, official `gaiad` releases do not output the hashes in the same format so you must compile `gaiad` with `ibc-go` at commit [4570955](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-go/commit/457095517b7832c42ecf13571fee1e550fec02d0).

> IBC won't tell you where to find a node from chain B, but once you've found one, you can get chain B's app hashes at certain block heights and compare them with what the chain B IBC light client on chain A tells you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
IBC won't tell you where to find a node from chain B, but after you've found one, you can get chain B's app hashes at certain block heights and compare them with what the chain B IBC light client on chain A tells you.
```

Querying chain A's IBC light client for chain B:

```sh
$ gaiad q ibc client consensus-states 07-tendermint-0 --node tcp://localhost:27000
consensus_states:
- consensus_state:
    '@type': /ibc.lightclients.tendermint.v1.ConsensusState
    next_validators_hash: A19419B856881CD94A27E0ED7EC6ADAD9FA749C5543D601E39AC6C4FB95CD8E0
    root:
      hash: IbhPNTZYeUYdk3pfZHHWP8VG/gefxGxkkvUuTrmVKkA=
    timestamp: "2021-05-20T13:49:41.169759553Z"
  height:
    revision_height: "906"
    revision_number: "0"
```

Now compare with chain B:
```sh
$ gaiad q ibc client node-state --node tcp://localhost:27010 --height 906
next_validators_hash: A19419B856881CD94A27E0ED7EC6ADAD9FA749C5543D601E39AC6C4FB95CD8E0
root:
  hash: IbhPNTZYeUYdk3pfZHHWP8VG/gefxGxkkvUuTrmVKkA=
timestamp: "2021-05-20T13:49:41.169759553Z"
```

## Getting Lower Level: Querying IBC By Using gaiad gRPC Endpoints

> So far we understand on a high level what needs to be done. But what is actually going on under the hood? How is `gaiad` getting all that data, and how can you access this data from another SDK or programming language, for example CosmJS?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So far you learned at a high level what needs to be done. But what is actually going on under the hood? How is `gaiad` getting all that data, and how can you access this data from another SDK or programming language, for example CosmJS?
```

Reviewer: @toschdev didn't we agree that all tutorial audiences are "you" (not "we")

At a low level, the `gaiad` instance invoked from your shell is contacting another `gaiad` instance that is running a blockchain node using its gRPC endpoint. SDKs make it easier to query these GRPC endpoints, but only the `main` branch of CosmJS provides methods for accessing these IBC queries. These methods are not available on 0.24.1, the latest branch available from the npm software registry.

You may be familiar with `curl` when developing HTTP REST APIs. The equivalent command for gRPC is [grpcurl](https://github.com/fullstorydev/grpcurl/blob/master/README.md). Install `grpcurl` and follow these steps.

### Start Two Chains That Are Connected By Using IBC

Install gaiad v4.2.1:

```
git clone git@github.com:cosmos/gaia.git
cd gaia && git checkout v4.2.1
make build && cp build/gaiad $GOPATH/bin/gaiad
```

Use cosmos-sdk v0.42.4:

> ```

Reviewer: for some reason I didn't have a cosmos-sdk directory (ouch)

The `gaiad q bank` does not unwrap the denomtrace:
```
$ gaiad q bank balances cosmos1957r6c38kc6gy94w0k9t7ear8xdg4j8xvm80xq --node tcp://localhost:26557
balances:
- amount: "1000000"
  denom: ibc/27A6394C3F9FF9C9DCF5DFFADF9BB5FE9A37C7E92B006199894CF1824DF9AC7C
- amount: "100000000000"
  denom: samoleans
- amount: "99999977240"
  denom: stake
pagination:
  next_key: null
  total: "0"
```

### Performing the Low Level gRPC Queries Using grpcurl

Now that you have a private IBC testnet setup, you can query the IBC endpoints:

```
$ grpcurl -plaintext -import-path ./third_party/proto -import-path ./proto \
-proto ./proto/ibc/applications/transfer/v1/query.proto \
localhost:9091 ibc.applications.transfer.v1.Query/DenomTraces
{
  "denomTraces": [
    {
      "path": "transfer/channel-0",
      "baseDenom": "samoleans"
    }
  ],
  "pagination": {
    "total": "1"
  }
}

$ grpcurl -plaintext -import-path ./third_party/proto -import-path ./proto \
-proto ./proto/ibc/core/channel/v1/query.proto \
-d '{"port_id": "transfer", "channel_id": "channel-0"}' \
localhost:9091 ibc.core.channel.v1.Query/ChannelClientState

> {

Reviewer: help! I don't know where commands actually end (I need a lot of teaching!)
